---
title: Personal Essay
author: Paul Zupan
date: June 11, 2023
fontsize: 12pt
geometry: margin=1in
output: pdf_document
---

Describe a topic, idea, or concept you find so engaging that it makes you lose
all track of time. Why does it captivate you? What or who do you turn to when
you want to learn more?

---

When I took the SAT in my junior year of high school, there was a phenomenon
among my classmates that stood out to me. Once the scores had been released,
naturally, we would compare them. "The English was easy, but I forgot all the
math stuff," they'd always say. I never felt that way. To me, the English
portion was always a slog, but I would coast so smoothly through the math one.
After all, the answer was always crystal clear, unlike in the English
questions, where it was locked securely among the thousands of ways one could
interpret it.

Rigorous topics like math and computer science are highly appealing to me for
that reason: I can find comfort in the fact that no matter who you are, how you
think, what your background is, what your personal experiences are, one plus
one is always two. There's no need to contemplate the meaning of a certain
mathematical operation in a particular context, or whether the code of a
computer program takes into account the rhetorical situation.

It just makes sense.

Did you know that there is a set of criteria such that if a system meets it, it
is said to be equivalent to any other computer? That set of criteria is called
Turing-completeness, a term coined by Alan Turing in the 1930's. You may not
realize it, but the world is full of computers in unexpected places. Magic: The
Gathering, a simple card game about fantastic creatures fighting to the death,
is Turing-complete. Minecraft, a video game about breaking and placing blocks,
is as well. I find it incredible that systems such as these that we think of as
limiting, are actually capable of performing the very same tasks as a standard
desktop computer. It's a wonder of nature.

It is quite common to think of a computer as a black box. You tell it to do
something, and it does it, no questions asked, methods be damned. That approach
to computing never satisfied me, however. I've always felt the need to
understand how things work. Plundering error messages is my specialty.

Computers are easier to interact with than humans, by multiple orders of
magnitude. If you say something wrong to a computer, say, in a programming
language, it will tell you exactly what it was and where you said it, and,
depending on the language, even how to fix it. I suppose that's part of what I
find appealing about them. Humans keep you guessing.

Some would call me pedantic, pretentious, or just annoying. It's true, maybe I
tend to cling to the rules to much. I just can't help it, though. Without
rules, how am I supposed to know whether or not I'm doing it right? And if my
choices are arbitrary, how am I supposed to explain my line of reasoning, much
less retrace my steps to figure out if each decision along the way has been
founded in logic? When it comes to the subject of math, where creativity is all
too often thrown out by the wayside, a position like mine is quite well
supported.

However, I'm only human. Some of my favorite things about engaging in these
seemingly boring tasks are actually the simplest. Seeing how each line of
calculation in the solution to a math problem lines up nicely among each other.
Feeling the satisfying clicks of my keyboard when creating a computer program.
Talking to the small green foam brain that sits patiently on my desk, helping
me rationalize the solution to any problem.

It's about the little things.

So, when I have a math test next period, when I get my homework problems for
the month, the kind of stuff that would make the typical high-school student
writhe, it's the highlight of my week.
