Describe a topic, idea, or concept you find so engaging that it makes you lose
all track of time. Why does it captivate you? What or who do you turn to when
you want to learn more?

---

When I took the SAT in my junior year of high school, there was a phenomenon
among my classmates that stood out to me. Once the scores had been released,
naturally, we would compare them. "The English was easy, but I forgot all the
math stuff," they'd always say. I never felt that way. To me, the English was
a slog, while the math was a breeze. After all, the answer was always crystal
clear, unlike the English section, in which the correct choice was securely
locked behind the thousands of ways one could interpret the question.

Rigorous topics like math and computer science are highly appealing to me for
that reason: I can find comfort in the fact that no matter who you are, how you
think, what your background is, what your personal experiences are, one plus
one is always two. There's no need to contemplate the meaning of a certain
mathematical operation in a particular context, or whether the code of a
computer program takes into account the rhetorical situation.

It just makes sense.

There are many facets of computer science that captivate me. One such facet is
the concept of the Turing machine: a long tape with a series of cells
containing numbers, and a device which can modify the value of a cell one at a
time. As it turns out, any system which can simulate the humble Turing machine
is capable of performing any computation. The fact that such a simple model has
the power to do virtually anything is astonishing.

It is quite common to think of a computer as a black box. You tell it to do
something, and it does it, no questions asked, methods be damned. That approach
to computing never satisfied me, however. I've always felt the need to
understand how things work. This has led me to the realization that behind the
screen, every computer, from the most decrepit laptop to NASA's quantum
computer, is just a tape with some numbers on it -- a Turing machine. The fact
that even the most complex of computers can be reduced to such a simple form is
baffling.

Computers are easier to interact with than humans, by multiple orders of
magnitude. If you say something wrong to a computer, say, in a programming
language, it will tell you exactly what it was and where you said it, and,
depending on the language, even how to fix it. I suppose that's part of what I
find appealing about them. On the other hand, humans keep you guessing. Even a
piece of enumerated adhesive could not begin to describe the human mind.

Some would call me pedantic, pretentious, or just annoying. It's true, maybe I
tend to cling to the rules to much. I just can't help it, though. Without
rules, how am I supposed to know whether or not I'm doing it right? If my
choices are arbitrary, how can I know if my process is sound? When it comes to
the subject of math, where breaking the rules is often frowned upon, a position
like mine is quite well supported.

One might presume that the mental exercise evoked by these topics is what is
most engaging. However, it's the simplest things that keep me coming back.
Seeing how each line of calculation in the solution to a math problem lines up
nicely among each other. Feeling the satisfying clicks of my keyboard when
creating a computer program. Talking to the small green foam brain that sits
patiently on my desk, helping me rationalize the solution to any problem.

It's about the little things.

So, when I have a math test next period, when I get my homework problems for
the month, the kind of stuff that would make the typical high-school student
writhe, it's the highlight of my week.
